Haridwar: Hundreds test positive for Covid at Kumbh Mela

Hundreds of devotees, including nine top saints, have tested positive for Covid-19 in India's Haridwar city where huge crowds have gathered to participate in the Kumbh Mela festival.

More than three million Hindu devotees bathed in the Ganges river on Tuesday to mark one of the most auspicious days of the two-month-long festival.

Millions are expected to repeat the ritual on Wednesday.

India reported 184,372 new cases on Tuesday - its highest-daily spike yet.

Many have criticised the government for allowing the festival to go ahead amid a raging pandemic.

Officials said that nearly 900,000 people had taken a dip in the holy river by afternoon on Wednesday, which is considered to be the most auspicious day of the entire festival.

Hindus believe that the Ganges river is holy, and taking a dip in the water will cleanse them of their sins and bring salvation.

Police officials say they are struggling to impose safety norms due to huge crowds on the banks of the river in the Himalayan state of Uttarakhand.

Officials leading the festival's Covid-19 testing cell told the BBC that out of more than 20,000 samples collected in the area on Tuesday, 110 returned positive results. On Monday, 184 devotees had tested positive. They have been isolated while others have been moved to hospitals in Haridwar city.

Dr Arjun Sengar, the health officer at the Kumbh Mela, said nine top religious leaders had also tested positive.

Narendra Giri, the president of a consortium of 14 Hindu groups, also tested positive. He has been admitted to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, which is a leading public hospital, in Haridwar.

Akhilesh Yadav, former chief minister of neighbouring Uttar Pradesh state, has also tested positive. He visited Haridwar on Sunday and met some top saints, including Mr Giri.

Yogi Adityanath, the current chief minister of Uttar Pradesh, has also tested positive although he did not visit the festival.

On Tuesday, Haridwar recorded 594 new cases, bringing the total tally of active cases to 2,812. Between Monday and Tuesday, it recorded more than 1,000 new cases.

There has been growing criticism of the government for allowing the gathering to take place even as India records huge surges in daily cases. Health experts had appealed for the Kumbh to be cancelled, but the government went ahead saying that safety rules would be followed.

Tirath Singh Rawat, the chief minister of Uttarakhand, told the media that "we are following the heath ministry's guidelines and the recovery rate is good".

"Arrangements are also adequate to deal with any situation."

"Ma [mother] Ganga's blessings are there in the flow [of the river]. So there should be no corona[virus]," ANI news agency quoted him as saying.

The government had earlier said that only people with Covid negative tests would be allowed to enter the festival, and that strict measures like social distancing would be followed. However, reports said that the administration is struggling to keep Covid safety protocols in place with many entering the festival without showing negative results.

Footage tweeted by ANI showed that many on the banks of the river were not wearing masks.

#WATCH | Sadhus of Niranjani Akhara participate in third 'shahi snan' at Har ki Pauri ghat in Uttarakhand's Haridwar #MahaKumbhpic.twitter.com/HAZmGgdiq7

The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.View original tweet on Twitter

The second wave is wreaking havoc across India. Reports of a shortage of hospital beds, life-saving drugs and medical oxygen have started coming in from different parts of the country. The western state of Maharashtra, which has been the worst affected by the virus, announced tighter restrictions on Tuesday evening. Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray said that for the next 15 days, only essential services would function.

"The war has begun again," he said at a press conference. The state recorded more than 60,000 cases on Tuesday.

Ten states across India - Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan and Kerala - account for 80.80% of daily cases.
final class	good
cotext-free class	good
heading	False
length (in characters)	204
number of characters within links	0
link density	0.000
number of words	37
number of stopwords	0
stopword density	0.000
html.body.div.div.main.div.div.div.article.div.div.p

With the total case tally of more than 13.5 million cases, India is now only behind the United States which has reported more than 31 million cases. With 13.4 million cases, Brazil is now at number three.
India's Covid doctors demand action after attacks

Dr Seuj Kumar Senapati vividly remembers the afternoon in early June he thought he would die.

It was his first job and his second day at work at a Covid care centre in Hojai district, in India's north-eastern state of Assam.

He was asked to check on a patient who had been admitted that morning. When he did, he found him unresponsive.

The patient's family was furious when he told them the man had died. In moments, Dr Senapati recalled, all hell broke loose. He said they started hurling chairs around the room, breaking windows and abusing staff.

Dr Senapati ran for cover, but soon more people joined the family and they found him.

A horrific video of the attack shows a group of mostly men kicking Dr Senapati and hitting him on the head with a bedpan - then they drag him outside and continue to beat him. Dr Senapati, bloodied and shirtless, can be heard howling in pain and fear.

Since the start of the pandemic in India last year, several doctors have been attacked by families of Covid patients. The recurring complaint: their loved ones weren't treated properly or weren't allotted a bed on time.

Doctors have protested and gone on strike demanding stricter laws, as well as more staffing and better infrastructure to relieve the pressure on them.

Hospitals too are ill-prepared. When Dr Senapati was being attacked, no-one came to his rescue because the remaining staff were also being beaten up or hiding. A lone guard was helpless against the mob.

"My clothes were torn, my gold chain was snatched and my mobile phone and spectacles were smashed. But after about twenty minutes, I managed to escape," Dr Senapati said.

He drove straight to the local police station and registered a complaint. The video of the attack, which has since been shared on social media, caused a furore. The state government promised swift action and 36 people, including three minors, have been charged for the assault.

While attacks on healthcare workers have been spotlighted during Covid, they occurred at alarming regularity before the pandemic too. Yet most incidents don't lead to police complaints or investigations. When they do, the accused are often released on bail quickly and the case is settled outside court.

Earlier this year, the family of a Covid patient who died in India's devastating second wave damaged property and abused staff at Apollo Hospital in the capital, Delhi. Despite being a prominent private hospital, it did not press charges. In fact, hospital administrations rarely get involved in such cases, leaving staff more vulnerable.

Doctors say one problem is that there is no specific law protecting them.

"We have found that existing laws are not effective and that is why they are not a deterrent. A strong law is urgently needed so people understand that there will be consequences for beating doctors," said Dr Jayesh Lele, secretary general of the Indian Medical Association (IMA).

With more than 330,000 doctors as members, the IMA has been campaigning hard for a stringent law to deter attacks against healthcare professionals.

"Such violence is not premeditated, but more an outcome of an emotional trigger caused by death. Hence, laws don't work as a deterrent," said Shreya Shrivastava, who has been tracking violence against doctors.

Ms Shrivastava is part of a research team at the Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy that studied newspaper reports of 56 attacks between January 2018 and September 2019 to understand what had caused them and how they can be curbed.

She said the government introduced a jail term of up to seven years as punishment for attacks on health workers treating Covid patients. But that hasn't helped.

Dr Vikas Reddy, a doctor at Gandhi Hospital in the southern city of Hyderabad, was attacked with iron and plastic chairs in June last year by relatives of a man who had died due to Covid. He filed a police complaint, but no-one has been arrested yet.

"It was difficult to go back to work," Dr Reddy said. "I was in the same acute medical care ward, seeing critical patients. I got flashes of the attack in my mind."

He said he spent a lot of time thinking about what happened.

"I was in a dilemma," he said. He wanted to know how to explain the diagnosis or break tragic news better to prevent another attack.

"I realised that we have to spend time with patients and their families to explain the things we can and can't do. And if they disagree, they need to take the patient to another hospital. But we don't have that kind of time. I see 20-30 patients in a day."

India has one of the worst doctor-patient ratios globally. In 2018, there were 90 physicians per 100,000 people, according to World Bank estimates. That's far lower than China (200), the US (260) or Russia (400).

And the pandemic has stretched an already thin workforce.

Ms Shrivastava's research revealed that attacks on healthcare workers usually happened when patients were in emergency wards or ICUs, shifted from one hospital to another or when they died. And all of this has become more frequent during the pandemic.

"Being inside a Covid ward is like being at war," said Dr Lele.

Then there is the issue of trust.

A largely unregulated and an expensive private sector provides two-thirds of all healthcare services in India.

Ms Shrivastava said people have been dying of Covid despite costly care, weakening trust in the system. And media reports of medical negligence, which tend to outnumber stories of doctors' struggles, make people more suspicious.
final class	good
cotext-free class	good
heading	False
length (in characters)	232
number of characters within links	0
link density	0.000
number of words	44
number of stopwords	0
stopword density	0.000
html.body.div.div.main.div.div.div.article.div.div.p

"The best we can do is give our best to the patient," Dr Reddy said. "We can't expect every patient [or family] to be nice [to us], just that they respect us as professionals and respect that we chose this profession to save lives."

